= Backwards Compatibility Breaks =

On this page you will find a list of all breaks in backwards compatibility.
Once Flourish becomes stable this will only happen with major version releases.
During the alpha phase they are bound to happen on a regular basis, whereas
during beta they should be rare.

''If you work with any protected methods or `@internal` public methods, be sure
to check out the [/docs/InternalBackwardsCompatibilityBreak internal backwards
compatiblity breaks] page.''

== Beta Phase ==

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/32c6129d Revision 1035] ===

`fTemplating::create()` was removed and a new method fTemplating::attach() was
created to provide similar functionality.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/3903f026 Revision 1031] ===

`fCore::detectOpcodeCache()` was renamed to fLoader::hasOpcodeCache()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/0d744a20 Revision 1026] ===

fFile::output() now automatically closes any open output buffering and discards
the contents.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/d05c8bf0 Revision 1011] ===

The email subject of error/exception emails sent by fCore has changed.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/c9e5633f Revision 1010] ===

fRecordSet::sort() and fRecordSet::sortByCallback() now return a new record set
instead of sorting the record set in place - this helps prevent side effects.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5b17e6e6 Revision 990] ===

fActiveRecord::reflect() now returns an associative array instead of a string.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/ee3eda47 Revision 984] ===

fSchema::getTables(), fSchema::getColumnInfo(), fSchema::getDatabases(),
fSchema::getKeys() and fSchema::getRelationships() now return database, schema,
table and column names in lowercase. This may change the behavior of, or break
ORM classes for SQLite, MySQL, PostgreSQL or MSSQL databases containing
mixed-case identifiers, although such mixed-cased identifiers have never been
officially supported. Please test ORM functionality when upgrading to this
revision.

Callbacks registered to the `extracted` hook via
fDatabase::registerHookCallback() no longer receive the `$strings` parameter,
instead all strings are added into the `$values` parameter.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/0b410b6d Revision 973] ===

Updated fCore::expose() to not wrap the value in an HTML tag when PHP is being
run via the CLI.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/0dd08754 Revision 969] ===

fRequest::getBestAcceptType() and fRequest::getBestAcceptLanguage() now return
either `NULL`, `FALSE` or a string instead of `NULL` or a string. See
[/docs/fRequest#RetrievingHTTPAcceptValues documentation] for details of return
values.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/a1ae8dc9 Revision 945] ===

The `$contents` parameter of fEmail::addAttachment() is now first instead of
third.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/fd0e0eae Revision 944] ===

fORMFile::configureImageUploadColumn() no longer accepts the optional
`$image_type` as the fourth parameter, instead fORMFile::addFImageMethodCall()
must be called with `saveChanges` as the `$method` and the image type as the
first parameter.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/a388312c Revision 943] ===

fRequest::get() now strips out low bytes characters if no `$cast_to`, or if a
`string` or `array` `$cast_to` is specified. Using the new `binary` `$cast_to`
will leave all bytes intact. 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/91441067 Revision 942] ===

fActiveRecord column `set` methods now treat strings of all whitespace the same
as empty strings and convert them to `NULL`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/aca98e00 Revision 934] ===

Changed the parameter order in fImage::crop() from `$crop_from_x`,
`$crop_from_y`, `$new_width`, `$new_height` to `$new_width`, `$new_height`,
`$crop_from_x`, `$crop_from_y`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/313acde2 Revision 917] ===

Changed the array structure for child record in validation messages. Instead of
all main record and child record messages being in a single array with keys in
the form of `child_table[0]::column`, there is now a `child_table[0]` key that
points to an array containing a `name` key and an `errors` key. The value for
`name` is the name of the child record, e.g. `Child Record #1`. The value for
`errors` is an array of validation messages with the keys being the column
names and the values being the validation messages. Thus:

{{{
array(
    'first_name' => 'First Name: Please enter a value',
    'user_permissions[0]::resource' => 'Resource: Please enter a value'
)
}}}

would now be represented as:

{{{
array(
    'first_name' => 'First Name: Please enter a value',
    'user_permissions[0]' => array(
        'name' => 'User Permission #1',
        'errors' => array(
            'resource' => 'Resource: Please enter a value'
        )
    )
)
}}}

Methods registered to the `pre::validate()` and `post::validate()` hooks will
need to handle this new array structure. Code that calls `->validate(TRUE)` on
an fActiveRecord object will need to handle this new array structure.
fORMValidation::addStringReplacement(), fORMValidation::addRegexReplacement()
and fORMValidation::setMessageOrder() will now only affect the specified class
specified and will not affect messages from child records.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/28548208 Revision 915] ===

Restructured individual record access, the iterator interface and callback
parameters for fRecordSet.

Removed the method `fRecordSet::fetchRecord()` - functionality can be
replicated via the new method fRecordSet::getRecord().

Manual iteration via `fRecordSet::current()`, `fRecordSet::key()`,
`fRecordSet::next()`, `fRecordSet::rewind()` and `fRecordSet::valid()`
(the Iterator interface) was removed and should be replaced by retrieving an
ArrayIterator from the new method fRecordSet::getIterator(). Manual iteration
can be performed on the ArrayIterator object.

The `$pointer` parameter was replaced with `$method_name` for callbacks
registered via fORM::registerRecordSetMethod().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/94b78744 Revision 911] ===

Changed fTemplating::delete() to return the value(s) of the element(s) deleted
instead of the fTemplating instance.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e7b5f799 Revision 904] ===

fSession::add(), fSession::delete(), fSession::get(), fSession::set(),
fTemplating::add(), fTemplating::delete(), fTemplating::get() and
fTemplating::set() all now interpret `[` and `]` as array syntax and thus
these can not be used in key or element names.

`fTemplating::remove()` was renamed to fTemplating::filter(). 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/6ce45b67 Revision 885] ===

Removed `fDatabase::enableSlowQueryWarnings()`, added ability to replicate via
fDatabase::registerHookCallback().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/1c311706 Revision 879] ===

Removed support for the `odbc` and `pdo_odbc` extensions from fDatabase,
fResult, fStatement and fUnbufferedResult. With this change, Flourish no longer
supports any kind of ODBC connections.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/58262812 Revision 854] ===

`fActiveRecord::populate{RelatedRecords}()` changed from requiring the database
table name as the input prefix to the `underscore_notation` version of the
class name. This will only affect related records where the class was mapped
using fORM::mapClassToTable().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b604ea2b Revision 840] ===

Renamed `fUpload::setMaxFilesize()` to fUpload::setMaxSize() to be consistent
with fFile::getSize().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/79457820 Revision 839] ===

fUpload no longer accepts uploaded files that start with a `.` unless
fUpload::allowDotFiles() is called.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/4891f35e Revision 833] ===

fActiveRecord::validate() now uses column names as array keys if messages are
returned, the `$validation_messages` parameter for the `pre::validate()` and
`post::validate()` hooks now requires array keys be column names and
fValidation::validate() now uses field names as array keys if messages are
returned.

fUpload::validate() no longer returns a `$_FILES` array.

fValidation::addRequiredFields() no longer accepts one-or-more rules, instead
use fValidation::addOneOrMoreRule(). fValidation::addRequiredFields() no longer
accepts conditional rules, instead use fValidation::addConditionalRule().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/72da3349 Revision 760] ===

fDirectory::scan() and fDirectory::scanRecursive() to strip the current
directory's path before matching the `$filter`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/26d79b1e Revision 736] ===

Renamed `fFile::getFilename()` to fFile::getName(), `fFile::getFilesize()` to
fFile::getSize(), `fFile::getDirectory()` to fFile::getParent() and
`fDirectory::getFilesize()` to fDirectory::getSize()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/8075c6db Revision 735] ===

Added the `$force_cascade` parameter to fActiveRecord::delete() and
fActiveRecord::store(). This change require any classes that override those
methods be updated to include at least one parameter.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b55d0d43 Revision 726] ===

`fORM::addCustomClassTableMapping()` was renamed to fORM::mapClassToTable()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5a19c8ed Revision 721] ===

Removed the `$prefix` parameter from the methods fSession::delete(),
fSession::get() and fSession::set()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/30b77654 Revision 720] ===

Removed support for date function translation in fDatabase/fSQLTranslation

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b2915f6a Revision 700] ===

Renamed `fRecordSet::buildFromRecords()` to fRecordSet::buildFromArray()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/fbe71f0b Revision 659] ===

Before this revision `one-to-one` relationships were not properly detected, so
some `one-to-many` functionality such as
`fActiveRecord::populate{RelatedRecords}()`,
`fActiveRecord::build{RelatedRecords}()` and
`fActiveRecord::associate{RelatedRecords}()` was working on these `one-to-one`
relationships when it should not have.

`one-to-one` relationships support `fActiveRecord::create{RelatedRecord}()`,
`fActiveRecord::populate{RelatedRecord}()` and
`fActiveRecord::associate{RelatedRecord}()` instead.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e7b2d448 Revision 651] ===

Renamed `fORMValidation::addConditionalValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addConditionalRule(),
`fORMValidation::addManyToManyValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addManyToManyRule(),
`fORMValidation::addOneOrMoreValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addOneOrMoreRule(),
`fORMValidation::addOneToManyValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addOneToManyRule(),
`fORMValidation::addOnlyOneValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addOnlyOneRule(),
`fORMValidation::addValidValuesValidationRule()` to
fORMValidation::addValidValuesRule() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e031537c Revision 591] ===

Removed `fRecordSet::flagAssociate()` and
`fRecordSet::isFlaggedForAssociation()`, the `$associate` parameter is no
longer passed to callbacks registered via fORM::registerRecordSetMethod() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/a158d016 Revision 567] ===

The first parameter of fSession::clear() was removed, fSession::delete() should
now be used instead 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/d6d9c907 Revision 566] ===

Moved `fCRUD::printOption()` to fHTML::printOption(), `fCRUD::showChecked()` to
fHTML::showChecked(), `fCRUD::removeListItems()` and
`fCRUD::reorderListItems()` to fException::splitMessage(),
`fCRUD::generateRequestToken()` to fRequest::generateCSRFToken(), and
`fCRUD::validateRequestToken()` to fRequest::validateCSRFToken() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/4491abdd Revision 562] ===

Removed `fORMSchema::enableSmartCaching()`, fORM::enableSchemaCaching() now
provides equivalent functionality. `fSchema::setCacheFile()` changed to
fSchema::enableCaching() and now requires an fCache object.
`fSchema::flushInfo()` was renamed to fSchema::clearCache(). 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/ff14fd2a Revision 525] ===

Changed the second parameter of fFile::output() from `$ignore_output_buffer`
to `$filename`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/322743e0 Revision 524] ===

Removed `fDate::getSecondsDifference()`, `fTime::getSecondsDifference()`,
`fTimestamp::getSecondsDifference()` and `fTimestamp::getSeconds()`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/09f5f00a Revision 514] ===

`fCore::getOS()` and `fCore::getPHPVersion()` were removed and replaced with
fCore::checkOS() and fCore::checkVersion() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/2691c60a Revision 499] ===

Renamed `fORM::addCustomTableClassMapping()` to
fORM::addCustomClassTableMapping() and swapped the parameters

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e2e48a71 Revision 498] ===

Changed fCryptography::symmetricKeyEncrypt() to not encrypt the IV since we are
using HMAC on it 

----

== Alpha Phase ==
''Most users will not have code from the Flourish alpha''

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/ec66b713 Revision 403] ===

`fCore::stringlike()` was removed

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/843e4a01 Revision 402] ===

`fCore::trigger()` was removed

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/45d33aa6 Revision 399] ===

!fPrintableException was renamed to fException

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b221d83a Revision 388] ===

`fCore::toss()` was removed and all exceptions are now normally thrown with
`throw new ExceptionName()`. `fCore::registerTossCallback()` was renamed to
`fPrintableException::registerCallback()`, `fGrammar::compose()` was renamed to
fText::compose() and `fGrammar::registerComposeCallback()` was renamed to
fText::registerComposeCallback(). 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/6f388cad Revision 374] ===

fActiveRecord hooks and method calls now have a `&$cache` parameter after the
`&$related_records` parameter, but before any other parameters. Any method
registered to a hook will need to have the method signature updated.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/3d22a999 Revision 364] ===

Swapped the order of the last two parameters of fORMRelated::setOrderBys() so
that `$route` (which is really just `NULL` most of the time) was last and
optional 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/99eb5d09 Revision 361] ===

Changed the existing file upload field name from
`__flourish_existing_column_name` to `existing-column_name` and changed the
delete file upload field name from `__flourish_delete_column_name` to
`delete-column_name` 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/920b4098 Revision 348] ===

`fNoResultsException` was renamed to fNoRowsException,
`fResult::tossIfNoResults()` was renamed to fRequest::tossIfNoRows(),
`fUnbufferedResult::tossIfNoResults()` was renamed to
fUnbufferedResult::tossIfNoRows(), `fResult::getAffectedRows()` was renamed to
fResult::countAffectedRows() and `fResult::getReturnedRows()` was renamed to
fRequest::countReturnedRows()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/c92bb99c Revision 332] ===

`fActiveRecord::has()` was renamed to fActiveRecord::hasOld() and
`fActiveRecord::retrieve()` was renamed to fActiveRecord::retrieveOld() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/08f818f5 Revision 331] ===

`replace::` hooks are no longer allowed in fORM::registerHookCallback(),
instead use fORM::registerActiveRecordMethod().
`fRecordSet::registerMethodCallback()` has been renamed to
fORM::registerRecordSetMethod().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/57b8a034 Revision 308] ===

Renamed `fORMDatabase::getInstance()` to fORMDatabase::retrieve() and renamed
`fORMSchema::getInstance()` to fORMSchema::retrieve()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/45be4b92 Revision 305] ===

`fUTF8::detect()` went from being public to private 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/fa6be338 Revision 304] ===

`fResult::getPointer()` was removed, same functionality is available from
fResult::key()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b96e833e Revision 303] ===

`fResult::areRemainingRows()` was removed, same functionality is available from
fResult::valid()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/2c36cbf1 Revision 300] ===

`fUpload::upload()` was renamed to fUpload::move()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/cbd894da Revision 298] ===

Changed fUpload from a static class to an instance class

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/4c458526 Revision 294] ===

Removed `fPrintableException::prepareMessage()`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e4089f17 Revision 293] ===

Removed `fTimestamp::combine()`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/093f2d20 Revision 289] ===

Changed the replacement token in fRequest::overrideAction() from `%%action%%` to `%action%` 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/fc757f03 Revision 282] ===

Changed the separator between the table name and column name for related form
inputs from . back to :: because PHP converts . to _ - this reverts changes in
r264

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/4001508d Revision 278] ===

`fRecordSet::build{RelatedRecords}()` was renamed to
`fRecordSet::prebuild{RelatedRecords}()` and
`fRecordSet::count{RelatedRecords}()` was renamed to
`fRecordSet::precount{RelatedRecords}()`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/9ad19034 Revision 277] ===

Removed `fRecordSet::countWithoutLimit()` and added the `$ignore_limit`
parameter to fRecordSet::count()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/96b8a2f2 Revision 264] ===

Changed the separator between the table name and column name for related form
inputs from `::` to `.` - `users::user_id[]` will now be `users.user_id[]`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e27ca21b Revision 263] ===

Removed `fRecordSet::buildFromPrimaryKeys()`, changed
fORMRelated::associateRecords() to only accept an fRecordSet instead of an
fRecordSet or an array of primary keys

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/c7a9f89d Revision 259] ===

Renamed `fORM::createActiveRecordClass()` to fORM::defineActiveRecordClass()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5291446a Revision 258] ===

Renamed `fFilesystem::createUniqueName()` to fFilesystem::makeUniqueName()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/6329fae0 Revision 257] ===

Renamed `fTimestamp::createFormat()` to fTimestamp::defineFormat()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/c6eee3ef Revision 253] ===

Removed `fORMDatabase::escapeByType()`, added support for shorthand
table.column names to fORMDatabase::escapeBySchema() to provide replacement
functionality 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/1c247eaa Revision 251] ===

The fourth parameter of fRecordSet::build() is now the page number instead of
the offset. The page number is subtracted by one and multiplied by the limit
to get the correct offset.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5c3b1530 Revision 250] ===

Removed `fGrammar::registerHumanizeCallback()`

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/97ec81f2 Revision 249] ===

`fGrammar::replaceHumanize()` was renamed to
fGrammar::registerHumanizeCallback(), `fGrammar::replaceJoinArray()` was
renamed to fGrammar::registerJoinArrayCallback().
`fGrammar::addAllCapitalsWord()` was removed and fGrammar::addHumanizeRule()
was added with similar functionality.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/8399ee64 Revision 239] ===

`fDate::setDate()`, `fDate::setISODate()`, `fTime::setTime()`,
`fTimestamp::setDate()`, `fTimestamp::setISODate()`, `fTimestamp::setTime()`,
`fTimestamp::setTimezone()`, `fTimestamp::getTimezone()` were removed. The
fDate, fTime and fTimestamp classes all became value objects (immutable) and
fDate::adjust(), fTime::adjust() and fTimestamp::adjust() all now return new
objects. Each class also gained a method called `modify()` which returns a new
object based on the current object, replacing the various set methods.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/7c6a0858 Revision 229] ===

Changed fCRUD::removeListItems() so its parameters were consistent with
fCRUD::reorderListItems()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/4ff669ca Revision 225] ===

`fXML::prepare()` was renamed to fXML::encode()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/7c67d80d Revision 223] ===

`fRecordSet::flagForAssociation()` was renamed to fRecordSet::flagAssociate() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/095c09ac Revision 222] ===

`fRecordSet::registerCallback()` was renamed to
fRecordSet::registerMethodCallback()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/dc35e6a8 Revision 221] ===

`fORM::getClassName()` was renamed to fORM::getClass() and
`fRecordSet::getClassName()` was renamed to fRecordSet::getClass()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5b39138e Revision 218] ===

`fHTML::checkForBlockLevelHTML()` was renamed to
fHTML::containsBlockLevelHTML() and `fHTML::createLinks()` was renamed to
fHTML::makeLinks()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/a4c6fc12 Revision 217] ===

`fCryptography::generateRandomString()` was renamed to
fCryptography::randomString() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/f58475fb Revision 216] ===

`fCRUD::createSortableColumn()` was renamed to fCRUD::printSortableColumn() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/5b552d4a Revision 215] ===

Removed ~fFinancialTransaction and ~fShippingRates. Both were unlike the rest
of Flourish in that they were tied to the APIs of other services and neither was very comprehensive in terms of the number of services supported.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/e5c99029 Revision 206] ===

Removed `fORMDatabase::initialize()`, you must now construct an fDatabase
instance and pass it to fORMDatabase::attach()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/0042a0ff Revision 205] ===

`fORMDatabase::prepareBySchema()` was renamed to fORMDatabase::escapeBySchema()
and `fORMDatabase::prepareByType()` was renamed to fORMDatabase::escapeByType() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/1207ef87 Revision 204] ===

fDatabase::escape() replaces `fDatabase::escapeBlob()`,
`fDatabase::escapeBoolean()`, `fDatabase::escapeDate()`,
`fDatabase::escapeFloat()`, `fDatabase::escapeInteger()`,
`fDatabase::escapeString()`, `fDatabase::escapeTime()` and
`fDatabase::escapeTimestamp()`. fDatabase::unescape() replaces
`fDatabase::unescapeBlob()`, `fDatabase::unescapeBoolean()`,
`fDatabase::unescapeDate()`, `fDatabase::unescapeFloat()`,
`fDatabase::unescapeInteger()`, `fDatabase::unescapeString()`,
`fDatabase::unescapeTime()` and `fDatabase::unescapeTimestamp()`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/521a55e6 Revision 202] ===

The second and third parameters of fMessaging::create() were swapped to be
consistent with the other fMessaging methods

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/05cd24e5 Revision 201] ===

`fORMColumn::configureDateCreatedColumn()` was moved to
fORMDate::configureDateCreatedColumn() and
`fORMColumn::configureDateUpdatedColumn()` was moved to
fORMDate::configureDateUpdatedColumn()

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/37eae733 Revision 195] ===

`fORMColumn::configureMoneyColumn()` was moved to
fORMMoney::configureMoneyColumn() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/980845ca Revision 184] ===

`fMoney::multiply()` renamed to fMoney::mul() and `fMoney::subtract()` renamed
to fMoney::sub() to be consistent with fNumber

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/66b4f30e Revision 174] ===

`fORMRelated::constructRecord()` renamed to fORMRelated::createRecord(),
`fORMRelated::constructRecordSet()` renamed to fORMRelated::buildRecords() 

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/90ac2353 Revision 173] ===

Renamed `fRecordSet::create()` to fRecordSet::build(), removed
`fRecordSet::createEmpty()`, renamed `fRecordSet::createFromObjects()` to
fRecordSet::buildFromRecords() and added a new first parameter, renamed
`fRecordSet::createFromPrimaryKeys()` to fRecordSet::buildFromPrimaryKeys(),
renamed `fRecordSet::createFromSQL()` to fRecordSet::buildFromSQL().

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/b942184f Revision 166] ===

fValidation no longer has the methods `fValidation::setEmailFields()`,
`fValidation::setEmailHeaderFields()` or `fValidation::setRequiredFields()`.
The various `fValidation::add*()` methods should be used instead.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/0231c739 Revision 144] ===

The method fImage::getInfo() went from being `public` to `protected`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/418540c0 Revision 127] ===

`fRecordSet::preload{RelatedRecords}()` became
`fRecordSet::build{RelatedRecords}()`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/8410513c Revision 125] ===

The `$debug` parameter was removed from all calls to fActiveRecord hook
callbacks.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/1fd0f7c4 Revision 84] ===

Removed `fRecordSet::preload{RelatedRecords}()`.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/a96e0974 Revision 81] ===

`fInflection` was renamed to fGrammar.

=== [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/commit/95cf1f34 Revision 76] ===

fMessaging::show() now behaves differently than it did before.