= fImage =
<<css mode="next" class="sidebar">>
(((
== Class Resources <<toc skip>> ==
 - '''[/docs/fImage Class Documentation]'''
 - [/api/fImage API Reference]
 - [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/blob/master/fImage.php Source Code]

<<toc bare>>

== Filesystem Classes <<toc skip>> ==
 - fFilesystem
 - fFile
  - '''fImage'''
 - fDirectory
 - fUpload
)))

The fImage class is a representation of an image file on the filesystem. It provides all of the functionality of the fFile class and adds the ability to perform image manipulation via GD or ImageMagick.

== Configuration ==

As mentioned above, the fImage class provide image manipulation by using either the command line program [http://imagemagick.org ImageMagick] or the [http://php.net/gd PHP GD extension]. fImage prefers ImageMagick since it provides superior performance and does not have the restriction of the PHP memory limit, like the GD extension does.

If the GD extension is not installed and ImageMagick can not be found in a standard location, fImage will need to be configured with the location of ImageMagick. This can be done by passing the ImageMagick binary’s directory to the static method ::setImageMagickDirectory().

{{{
#!php
// An example of manually configuring ImageMagick
fImage::setImageMagickDirectory('/usr/local/imagemagick/bin');
}}}

In addition to configuring the path to the ImageMagick binaries, it is also possible to set a temporary directory for ImageMagick to use when processing files. The ::setImageMagickTempDir() static method performs this task and takes a single parameter `$temp_dir`.

{{{
#!php
// Setting a custom temporary directory for ImageMagick
fImage::setImageMagickTempDir('/tmp/imagemagick');
}}}

== Image Information ==

The fImage class includes a few methods to provide basic metadata about the image. ::getWidth() and ::getHeight() provide straight-forward access to image dimensions. ::getDimensions() returns a two-element array of the width, then the height.

{{{
#!php
$width  = $image->getWidth();
$height = $image->getHeight();

list($witdh, $height) = $image->getDimensions();
}}}

The method ::getType() will return a string with the image type. Types include: `'jpg'`, `'gif'`, `'png'` and `'tif'`.

{{{
#!php
$type = $image->getType();
}}}

== Modification ==

Probably the most significant functionality of the fImage class is the ability to modify an image. There are currently three different modifications that can be performed: ::crop(), ::cropToRatio(), ::resize() and ::desaturate().

Calling any of these modifications will not actually cause the changes to be written to disk until [#SavingChanges `saveChanges()`] is called.

=== Cropping ===

::crop() accepts four parameters, the pixels dimensions for `$new_width` and `$new_height`, `$crop_from_x`, `$crop_from_y`, and will perform pixel-specific cropping.

{{{
#!php
// Create a 16x16 icon from the top left of an image
$image1 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image1->crop(16, 16, 0, 0);
$image1->saveChanges();
}}}

It is also possible to crop with `$crop_from_x` and `$crop_from_y` being a string position. The possible values for `$crop_from_x` are `left`, `center` and `right`. The possible values for `$crop_from_y` are `top`, `center` and `bottom`.

{{{
#!php
// Create a 16x16 icon from the top right of an image
$image1 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image1->crop(16, 16, 'right', 'top');
$image1->saveChanges();
}}}

::cropToRatio() will crop the largest rectangle our of an image that conforms to the ratio passed in via `$ratio_width` and `$ratio_height`. By default, the crop is made from the center of the image.

{{{
#!php
// Create a 32x32 icon from an image
$image3 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image3->cropToRatio(1, 1);
$image3->resize(32, 32);
$image3->saveChanges();
}}}

Similar to ::crop(), it is possible to crop to a ratio from a specific position in the image. The third parameter, `$horizontal_position` accepts either `left`, `center` or `right`. The fourth parameter, `$vertical_position`, accepts `top`, `center` or `bottom`.

{{{
#!php
// Create a 32x32 icon from the bottom right of an image
$image3 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image3->cropToRatio(1, 1, 'right', 'bottom');
$image3->resize(32, 32);
$image3->saveChanges();
}}}

=== Desaturating ===

::desaturate() will cause the image to lose all color information and become grayscale.

{{{
#!php
// Change the image to be grayscale
$image3 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image3->desaturate();
$image3->saveChanges();
}}}

=== Resizing ===

::resize() will scale the image to fit the canvas size defined by the parameters `$canvas_width` and `$canvas_height`. If either parameter is `empty()` or `0`, the image will be resized to fit the specified dimension.

{{{
#!php
// Ensure an image is never wider than 250 pixels
$image4 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image4->resize(250, 0);
$image4->saveChanges();
}}}

`resize()` can also accept an optional third parameter, `$allow_upsizing`. By default `resize()` will only make the image smaller, but when this is `TRUE` the image will be made to fit the dimensions even if it must be increased in size.

{{{
#!php
// Make an image exactly 100 pixels wide
$image5 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image5->resize(100, 0, TRUE);
$image5->saveChanges();
}}}

== Saving Changes ==

::saveChanges() can accept from zero to three parameters. The first optional parameter is the `$new_image_type` which can be `'jpg'`, `'gif'` or `'png'`. If no `$new_image_type` is specified, the image will be resaved in the current format.

{{{
#!php
// Saving as a PNG
$image2 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image2->resize(250, 0);
$image2->saveChanges('png');
}}}

If the `'jpg'` image type is specified, there is a second optional parameter, the `$jpeg_quality` to use. If no `$jpeg_quality` is specified, `90` is used as the default.

{{{
#!php
// Saving as a 60 quality JPEG
$image2 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image2->resize(250, 0);
$image2->saveChanges('jpeg', 60);
}}}

A third optional parameter, `$overwrite`, accepts a boolean and will cause a file with the same name and type to be overwritten. For example, if the file is currently `image.gif` and you call `saveChanges()` with the parameter `'jpg'` and another file named `image.jpg` exists, by default `image.gif` will be saved with changes as `image_copy1.jpg`. When `$overwrite` is `TRUE`, `image.jpg` will be overwritten.

{{{
#!php
// Saving as a PNG and overwrite any existing example.png
$image2 = new fImage('./example.gif');
$image2->resize(250, 0);
$image2->saveChanges('png', TRUE);
}}}