= fORMColumn =
<<css mode="next" class="sidebar">>
(((
== Class Resources <<toc skip>> ==
 - '''[/docs/fORMColumn Class Documentation]'''
 - [/api/fORMColumn API Reference]
 - [https://github.com/flourishlib/flourish-classes/blob/master/fORMColumn.php Source Code]

<<toc bare>>

== ORM Classes <<toc skip>> ==
 - fActiveRecord
 - fRecordSet

 - fORM
 - '''fORMColumn'''
 - fORMDatabase
 - fORMDate
 - fORMFile
 - fORMJSON
 - fORMMoney
 - fORMOrdering
 - fORMRelated
 - fORMSchema
 - fORMValidation
)))

The fORMColumn class is an ORM plugin to provide miscellaneous additional functionality to individual columns.

== Email Columns ==

The static method ::configureEmailColumn() sets a column to be validated as an email address. The first parameter is the `$class` the column is located in and the second parameter is the `$column`. As with most active record plugins, this method should normally be called from the `configure()` method. 

{{{
#!php
class User extends fActiveRecord
{
    protected function configure()
    {
        fORMColumn::configureEmailColumn($this, 'email');
    }
}
}}}

== Link Columns ==

Columns can be configured as a link column by passing the `$class` and `$column` to the static method fORMColumn::configureLinkColumn(). When the record is validated, the link will be checked to make sure it contains a valid domain name, however `http://` is not required. When calling the `prepare` method for the column, it will ensure that the link begings with `http://` for output into a HTML `<a>` tag.

{{{
#!php
class NewsArticle extends fActiveRecord
{
    protected function configure()
    {
        fORMColumn::configureLinkColumn($this, 'link');
    }
}

$news_article = new NewsArticle();
$news_article->setLink('www.example.com');

echo $news_article->getLink();
echo $news_article->prepareLink();
}}}

The above PHP would output the following:

{{{
www.example.com
http://www.example.com
}}}

== Number Columns ==

While fActiveRecord automatically handles both integer and floating point numbers, sometimes it is necessary to have a column’s value be represented as an fNumber object. The static method ::configureNumberColumn() ensures that values loaded out of the database are automatically converted to an fNumber object. The first parameter is the `$class` and the second parameter is the `$column`.

{{{
#!php
class Product extends fActiveRecord
{
    protected function configure()
    {
        fORMColumn::configureNumberColumn($this, 'weight');
    }
}
}}}

== Random Columns ==

In some situations a random string is useful for providing security when resetting passwords, validating email accounts or establishing access authentication. The static method ::configureRandomColumn() will cause a column to be set to a random string when the record is first saved and will allow generating a new random string at any time by calling `generateColumnName()`.

::configureRandomColumn() accepts four parameters, the `$class` to be configured, the `$column`, the `$type` of random string (see fCryptography::randomString() for options) and the `$length` of the string.

{{{
#!php
class User extends fActiveRecord
{
    protected function configure()
    {
        fORMColumn::configureRandomColumn($this, 'access_code', 'alphanumeric', 16);
    }
}

// Create a new user and get their access code
$user = new User();
$user->store();
$access_code = $user->getAccessCode();

// Generate a new random string for the access code
$user->generateAccessCode();
$access_code = $user->getAccessCode();
}}}