= Getting Started =
<<toc>>

Since Flourish isn’t a framework, getting started might seem a little daunting.
Let’s start with getting the Flourish code and setting up our pages to include
it.

== Downloading Flourish ==

As a first step, [http://flourishlib.com/download/ download flourish] and
extract it into a directory on your server. To help ensure that a server
misconfiguration won’t expose your PHP (possibly including database
credentials), it is best to try and place your includes outside of the document
root.

{{{
{doc_root}/../inc/flourish/
}}}

== Set Up an Init Script ==

At the beginning of every page we aren’t going to want to include every class
file or configuration file, so a logical first step is to create an
initialization script to handle that. I prefer to create the script at:

{{{
{doc_root}/../inc/init.php
}}}

Inside of init.php, put:

{{{
#!php
<?php
include($_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] . '/../inc/config.php');
}}}

== Create a Configuration Script ==

For better separation, I prefer to put all configuration code into a separate
file from the initialization code. I put all of my configuration code in:

{{{
{doc_root}/../inc/config.php
}}}

Inside of `config.php` we will put our auto-loading function:

{{{
#!php
<?php
/**
 * Automatically includes classes
 * 
 * @throws Exception
 * 
 * @param  string $class_name  Name of the class to load
 * @return void
 */
function __autoload($class_name)
{
	// Customize this to your root Flourish directory
	$flourish_root = $_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] . '/../inc/flourish/';
	
	$file = $flourish_root . $class_name . '.php';

	if (file_exists($file)) {
		include $file;
		return;
	}
	
	throw new Exception('The class ' . $class_name . ' could not be loaded');
}
}}}

'''Performance tip:''' If you are running Flourish on a server that has
[http://pecl.php.net/package/APC APC], [http://eaccelerator.net eAccelerator],
[http://turck-mmcache.sourceforge.net/index_old.html Turck MMCache] or
[http://xcache.lighttpd.net XCache] check out the section about
[/docs/PerformanceTips#ClassLoading class loading].

== Start Using Flourish ==

Now that we have our init script setup, we can start creating pages and using
Flourish. Just add this snippet to the top of each of your pages:

{{{
#!php
<?php
include_once($_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] . '/../inc/init.php');
}}}

Alternatively if you run Apache and have access to the Apache conf file, you can
use PHP’s [http://php.net/ini.core#ini.auto-prepend-file auto_prepend_file]
setting with the [http://php.net/configuration.changes Apache PHP settings
directives].

== Next Steps ==

If you haven’t read it already, the [/docs/HowDoI How Do I … ?] page is a good
resource for exploring some of the functionality of Flourish. The [/docs
documentation] includes links to detailed information about each class, class
APIs and general documentation.

The '''[/blog/FlourishDemoSite Flourish Demo Site]''' is a good way to dive
into some code to see how Flourish can be used.

For a simpler more guided introduction to Flourish, try checking out the
following classes:

 - fTemplating: Provides a simple templating system to help reduce duplicated
   HTML
 - fRequest: Retrieves information submitted by the user, in a secure fashion
 - fDatabase: Standard SQL interaction with any MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite,
   MSSQL, Oracle or DB2 database

The documentation below includes some topics that most PHP developers should
know or learn about:

 - [/docs/Security PHP/web security]
 - [/docs/UTF-8 UTF-8 in PHP]
 - [/docs/ObjectRelationalMapping ORM (Object-Relational Mapping)]