= Internationalization and Localization =

When creating code for audiences in more than one language, it is necessary to
write it with
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internationalization_and_localization
internationalization (i18n) and localization (L10n)] in mind.

A [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locale locale] is a combination of a language
and standards for formatting of numbers, date, currencies and more. Normally an
locale is identified by a combination of a country and language code. Different
languages require different sort ordering (or
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collation collation]) for words and numbers often
have different thousands and decimal separators. Other differences include date
formatting and the words used for days and months.

Internationalization is the act of writing code than can be customized to work
in multiple locales. Localization is the act of customizing code to work in a
specific locale. Flourish is written with internationalization in mind, however
there is no localization done, that is left for the teams working on individual
projects.

== Internationalized Classes ==

The following classes in Flourish are in some way internationalized, thus
capable of being localized.
 
 - fGrammar
 - fMoney
 - fNumber
 - fText
 - fTimestamp

Please note that every class in Flourish that creates messages hooks into fText
(once loaded) and thus all messages can be translated through the features
available in fText. The [/docs/MessagesList message list page] includes a list
of every message created by a Flourish class, along with the location in the
source code.
