= Performance Tips =
<<toc>>

This page is a small collection of some tips to help increase performance of you
PHP code. Most of them require that you have enough control of the server to be
able to change settings in Apache and load different PHP extensions.

== Opcode Caching ==

Under normal operation, PHP will load each source code file upon each request.
The source code files are first compiled into PHP opcodes and then the opcodes
are executed. A number of PHP opcode caching extensions exist that keep the
compiled opcodes stored in memory and only regenerate the opcode if the source
code changes.

 - [http://pecl.php.net/package/APC APC]
 - [http://eaccelerator.net eAccelerator]
 - [http://turck-mmcache.sourceforge.net/index_old.html Turck MMCache]
 - [http://xcache.lighttpd.net XCache]

Mike Willbanks has
[http://blog.digitalstruct.com/2007/12/24/accelerators-revisited/ a comparison
of APC, eAccelerator and XCache] from late 2007.

fLoader will utilize the most performant loading technique based on the current
execution environment. If a opcode cache is present, all classes will be
included. If not, autoloading will be done via
[http://php.net/spl_autoload_register `spl_autoload_register()`].

== Extensions ==

A few of the Flourish classes provide pure PHP implementations of functionality
that is also available from extensions that are not installed by default. Below
is a list of the classes and the extension that will provide better performance.

|| '''Class'''    || '''Extension'''                                         ||
|| fJSON          || [http://php.net/json json] (included in 5.2 by default) ||
|| fNumber/fMoney || [http://php.net/bc bcmath]                              ||
|| fUTF8          || [http://php.net/mbstring mbstring]                      ||